---
layout: post
title: What's new in Angular CLI 10.1?
author: cexbrayat
tags: ["Angular 10", "Angular", "Angular CLI"]
description: "Angular CLI 10.1 is out!"
---

[Angular CLI 10.1.0](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/releases/tag/v10.1.0) is out!✨

If you want to upgrade to 10.1.0 without pain (or to any other version, by the way), I have created a Github project to help: [angular-cli-diff](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff). Choose the version you're currently using (10.0.0 for example), and the target version (10.1.0 for example), and it gives you a diff of all files created by the CLI: [angular-cli-diff/compare/10.0.0...10.1.0](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff/compare/10.0.0...10.1.0).
It can be a great help along the official `ng update @angular/core @angular/cli` command.
You have no excuse for staying behind anymore!

Let's see what we've got in this release.

## TypeScript 4.0

As Angular v10.1 now support TS 4.0,
the CLI now also does, of course.

## Reverting "Solution Style" TypeScript configurations

If you read [our blog post about CLI v10.0](/2020/06/25/angular-cli-10.0/),
you may remember that this version included a migration to "Solution Style" TS configurations, a new feature from TS 3.9.

Well, it turned out to be not so great for big projects as it slowed down the compilation and tools...
Couple this with a few other issues, and the CLI team decided to revert these changes.
So, if you create a new project with CLI v10.1,
then you'll find a base `tsconfig.json` extended by the more specific ones,
as it was before v10.

If you update your application using the `ng update` command,
a schematics will automatically revert the changes introduced in v10 for you.

## i18n

`@angular/localize` is getting better and better (check our [Angular v10.1 blog post](/2020/09/03/what-is-new-angular-10.1/)),
and the integration with the CLI is improving.

If you run `ng xi18n` in one of your applications, you'll see:

    Ivy extraction not enabled but application is Ivy enabled. If the extraction fails, the `--ivy` flag will enable Ivy extraction.

This is because, until now, Angular relied on View Engine to extract the messages. Since v10.1, it now uses the new extractor from `@angular/localize`, if you run the command with `--ivy` (it's explicit for the moment as it is still a work in progress, and there are some regressions).

A few things are better though: with the `--ivy` flag,
the CLI now also extracts messages passed to the `$localize` function in the TypeScript files 🎉.
Check out our [article about localize](/2019/12/10/angular-localize/) to see what I'm talking about.

The Ivy extraction will become the default in the near future.

The CLI also allows specifying several translations files per locale,
and will merge the messages when building the app:

    "i18n": {
      "locales": {
        "fr": ["src/locale/messages.fr.xlf", "src/locale/messages-2.fr.xlf"]
      }
    },

You'll get a warning message if you have duplicated messages:

    WARNING [src/locale/messages.fr.xlf]: Duplicate translations for message 'home.title' when merging

## async() helper renamed

As explained in our [Angular v10.1 article](/2020/09/03/what-is-new-angular-10.1/),
the testing helper function `async` has been deprecated and renamed `waitForAsync`.

You can simply replace it everywhere and you're good to go: there is no change in behavior between `async()` and the new `waitForAsync()`.

My 2cts though: you may want to take this occasion to simply remove most of these calls as they often are unnecessary. And when they are necessary, rewriting them with `fakeAsync` and `tick` makes them more readable.

    it('should ...', async(() => {
      somethingAsync()
        .then(() => expect(element.textContent).toBe(...));
    }));

can be rewritten in a synchronous way:

    it('should ...', fakeAsync(() => {
      somethingAsync();
      tick();
      expect(element.textContent).toBe(...);
    }));

A lot of your `async` calls are probably from the code generated by the CLI as it used to generate this test setup for components:

    beforeEach(async(() => {
      TestBed.configureTestingModule({
        declarations: [
          AppComponent
        ],
      }).compileComponents();
    }));

In v10.1, the CLI switched to the `async` keyword:

    beforeEach(async () => {
      await TestBed.configureTestingModule({
        declarations: [
          AppComponent
        ],
      }).compileComponents();
    });

But a little known fact is that this is not necessary: you can remove `compileComponents` as the CLI takes care of it behind the scenes. And if you remove `compileComponents`, you can remove `async`:

    beforeEach(() => TestBed.configureTestingModule({
      declarations: [AppComponent]
    }));

This is something that have been bothering me for a long time, so I decided to open a PR to fix it in the CLI. You can show your support with a little 👍on [https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/pull/18316](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/pull/18316) and maybe we'll have this simplified setup in v11.

In the meantime you can probably remove a lot of `async()` calls in your application 😉.

## build-ng-packagr deprecation

The `@angular-devkit/build-ng-packagr` package has been deprecated,
and replaced by the `@angular-devkit/build-angular:ng-packagr` builder.
You can remove it from your `package.json`,
and update the task in the `angular.json` config to `@angular-devkit/build-angular:ng-packagr`.

Or you can wait for the automatic migration in v11 😃.

## Hot Module Reloading

If you use [HMR](https://webpack.js.org/guides/hot-module-replacement) when developing your applications,
you'll be please to know that the CLI now supports CSS hot reloading,
even when using the `extractCss` option.
This option will in fact be deprecated in v11.

## Strict applications

Angular v10.1 introduced a new compiler option `strictInputAccessModifiers`,
and the CLI now includes it in your `tsconfig.json` if you generate an application with the `--strict` flag.
You can of course add it to your existing application.
Check out our [blog post about Angular v10.1](/2020/09/03/what-is-new-angular-10.1/) to learn more about this option.

The next release will probably be v11, and bring some cool new features!

All our materials ([ebook](https://books.ninja-squad.com/angular), [online training](https://angular-exercises.ninja-squad.com/) and [training](https://ninja-squad.com/training/angular)) are up-to-date with these changes if you want to learn more!
