---
layout: post
title: What's new in Angular CLI 10.0?
author: cexbrayat
tags: ["Angular 10", "Angular", "Angular CLI"]
description: "Angular CLI 10.0 is out!"
---

[Angular CLI 10.0.0](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/releases/tag/v10.0.0) is out!✨

If you want to upgrade to 10.0.0 without pain (or to any other version, by the way), I have created a Github project to help: [angular-cli-diff](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff). Choose the version you're currently using (8.3.8 for example), and the target version (10.0.0 for example), and it gives you a diff of all files created by the CLI: [angular-cli-diff/compare/8.3.8...10.0.0](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff/compare/8.3.8...10.0.0).
It can be a great help along the official `ng update @angular/core @angular/cli` command.
You have no excuse for staying behind anymore!

Let's see what we've got in this release.

## Angular 10 and TypeScript 3.9

This new release supports Angular 10 of course,
and now requires TypeScript 3.9.

One of the new features is
[the support for “Solution Style”](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/typescript/announcing-typescript-3-9/#solution-style-tsconfig) `tsconfig.json` files.
This allow IDEs to more easily find which project a TS file belongs to,
when you have several `tsconfig` files
(it's better explained in the release post if you want to learn more 🤓).

As an Angular CLI project _does_ have several `tsconfig` files,
this improvement is useful to us!
The CLI now generates projects with a base `tsconfig`,
extended by the the app one, the unit tests one, and the e2e tests one.
The `tsconfig.json` file now only references the others.
If you update your application using the `ng update` command,
a schematics will automatically do this refactor for you.

## Evergreen applications by default

New applications are now only targeting evergreen browsers by default.
This means that the [browserslist](https://github.com/browserslist/browserslist)
configuration now only includes the latest releases of each major browser
when generating a new application.
It also means that a newly generated application does not have differential loading,
so it does not build twice!
[Differential loading](/2019/05/29/angular-cli-8.0/) was introduced in Angular CLI v8.0,
and is great if you need to support older browsers.
If you want to have differential loading in a new application,
you can generate your application using the new `--legacy-browsers` flag:

    ng new my-app --legacy-browsers

Or you can manually update the browserslist config to finely tune which browsers you want to support
(`--legacy-browsers` adds IE9-11 to the config),
and the CLI will automatically build your application once or twice accordingly.

Note that if you only target modern browsers,
the resulting JS files are no longer suffixed with `es2015`.

## Stricter applications

The `--strict` flag [introduced in version 9.1](/2020/03/26/angular-cli-9.1/)
for `ng new` now goes further:

- it enables `strict: true` in your `tsconfig.base.json`, and adds a bunch of others flags (`forceConsistentCasingInFileNames`, `noFallthroughCasesInSwitch` and `noImplicitReturns`)
- it adds `strictTemplates` and `strictInjectionParameters` to `angularCompilerOptions` in your `tsconfig.base.json`
- it generates an extra `package.json` file with `sideEffects: false` (see below)
- it lowers the budgets for initial load and component styles in `angular.json`,
and adds the strict settings to the application `schematics`
- it adds the `no-any` rule to your `tslint.json`

## Bundle optimizations

If you generate a new application with the `--strict` flag,
you'll see that an extra `package.json` file is now present in `src/app`.
It does not contain any dependencies, only:

    {
      "name": "my-app",
      "private": true,
      "description": " ... ",
      "sideEffects": true
    }

The long description explains that this file is only useful for bundlers,
to signal if our code has non-local side effects or not.
You can probably safely change the value of the `sideEffects` option to `false`,
and the CLI/Webpack will optimize the generated bundle more aggressively.
You can of course manually add this file to your application to give it a try.
I didn't spot any stellar improvements in bundle sizes for my applications though...

## Warnings when depending on CommonJS packages

Bundlers like Webpack have a hard time optimizing CommonJS packages.
The CLI now warns you when you build or serve your application if you use CommonJS dependencies:

    WARNING in src/app/chart/chart.component.ts depends on chart.js. CommonJS or AMD dependencies can cause optimization bailouts.
    For more info see: https://angular.io/guide/build#configuring-commonjs-dependencies

If you want to learn more about this,
check out [this article](https://web.dev/commonjs-larger-bundles/),
it's very well explained.

If you can't do otherwise,
you can add the following option to your `angular.json` file to remove the warning:

    "build": {
      "builder": "@angular-devkit/build-angular:browser",
      "options": {
        // ...
        "allowedCommonJsDependencies": ["chart.js"]
      }


## Deprecations and removals

A few deprecated commands and options have been removed:

- `ng get/set` no longer exist: use `ng config` instead.
- the `es5BrowserSupport`, `elementExplorer`, `evalSourceMap`, `vendorSourceMap`, `profile`, `skipAppShell` and `typescriptMismatch` options are removed as well.

A schematic takes care of updating the `angular.json` file for you.

Note that you can also remove the `@angular/language-service` package from your `package.json`.
This package was needed by VSCode extension to have autocompletion/type-checking in the templates.
It is no longer necessary to install it ourselves, as the extension now directly embeds it
(and I think most IDE extensions do).

## Automatic migrations in v10

When running `ng update @angular/cli`, some schematics are going to update your code.
The command:

- renames `browserslist` to `.browserslistrc`.
- changes the target for TypeScript from `esnext` to `es2020`, which is currently the same thing, but using `es2020` makes sure there is no changes in behavior when `es202x` comes out.
- removes the deprecated builder options in `angular.json` (see above).
- refactors the `tsconfig` files as explained in the first section
- adds the [`deprecation` rule](https://palantir.github.io/tslint/rules/deprecation/) to your TSLint config if you don't have it.
- bumps a few dependencies

As you can see, this 10.0 release has some interesting new features!

All our materials ([ebook](https://books.ninja-squad.com/angular), [online training](https://angular-exercises.ninja-squad.com/) and [training](https://ninja-squad.com/training/angular)) are up-to-date with these changes if you want to learn more!
