---
layout: post
title: What's new in Angular CLI 13.0?
author: cexbrayat
tags: ["Angular 13", "Angular", "Angular CLI"]
description: "Angular CLI 13.0 is out!"
---

[Angular CLI 13.0.0](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/releases/tag/13.0.0) is out!✨

If you want to upgrade to 13.0.0 without pain (or to any other version, by the way), I have created a Github project to help: [angular-cli-diff](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff). Choose the version you're currently using (12.2.0 for example), and the target version (13.0.0 for example), and it gives you a diff of all files created by the CLI: [angular-cli-diff/compare/12.2.0...13.0.0](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff/compare/12.2.0...13.0.0).
It can be a great help along with the official `ng update @angular/core @angular/cli` command.
You have no excuse for staying behind anymore!

Let's see what we've got in this release.


## Angular cache

The CLI now saves its cache on disk.
It is enabled by default, so running `ng serve` creates a directory `.angular/cache` in your project root.
Note that it is enabled only on your local machine by default,
but this can be configured.
To disable it, you can run `ng config cli.cache.enabled false`

Or you can update the configuration in your `angular.json` file,
for example to enable it everywhere and in a different directory:

    "cli": {
      "cache": {
        "enabled": true,
        "environment": "all", // or "local" or "ci"
        "path": ".angular-cache"
      }
    }

The `NG_PERSISTENT_BUILD_CACHE` that we were talking about in [our article about Angular CLI 12.1](/2021/06/25/angular-cli-12.1) is no longer useful and replaced by this cache configuration.

There is no command to clear the cache, just run `rm -rf .angular/cache`.



## Differential loading removed

Differential loading had been introduced in [Angular CLI 8.0](/2019/05/29/angular-cli-8.0),
and used to output ES5 and ES2015+ variants of the application.
As IE11 is no longer supported, there are now no officially supported browsers that require ES5 code.
As a result, `ng build` no longer does differential loading, and only outputs ES2015+ code.

IE11 no longer being a concern, all the script tags that the CLI adds to your `index.html` file
now have `type="module"` specified.


## Automatic migrations

A few schematics will update your configuration files when upgrading to v13.
As some options were removed like `extractCss` (after being deprecated in the previous versions),
one of the schematics will remove them if you still had them in your `angular.json` file.
Another schematics will remove the unneeded polyfills `classlist.js` and `web-animations-js` from `polyfills.ts`,
as IE11 is no longer supported.
`.gitignore` will also be updated to add `/.angular/cache` as a result of the new cache system.

As a side note, migrations are now required to be done one major version at a time.
So if you want to update from Angular v11 to v13, you need to run:

    ng update @angular/core@12 @angular/cli@12
    # check that everything is ok
    # then
    ng update @angular/core@13 @angular/cli@13


## Deprecations

The `deployUrl` option for `ng build` has been deprecated.
It was previously introduced to handle applications that only store their assets on a CDN.
It is now recommended to host the entire application on a CDN.
It is still possible to achieve the same behavior as `deployUrl` by setting the `baseHref` to the CDN address
while setting the `APP_BASE_HREF` to the application address.


## ng serve

The dev server is now using webpack-dev-server v4,
which means it relies on WebSockets to communicate changes to the browser
to trigger a live-reload.
If you're using a proxy, remember to enable proxy on WebSockets as well.

As we're talking about the proxy configuration,
note that it is now possible to define its configuration as an ESM module (ending with `.mjs`),
in addition to JSON and CommonJS:

    export default {
      '/api/*': { target: 'http://localhost:8080/api" }
    }

A ton of work has been done to improve the ESM support in the CLI and the framework
Angular now ships as an ESM as well.
The new Angular Package Format is now documented directly on [angular.io](https://angular.io/guide/angular-package-format)
if you're curious.
The CLI will now prefer the ESM version of a dependency if it finds it.
This makes sense as ES modules are the future, recent NodeJS versions support them,
and more and more projects are using them
(tools like [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) for example,
that the Angular team is considering as a possible future for the CLI).

All our materials ([ebook](https://books.ninja-squad.com/angular), [online training](https://angular-exercises.ninja-squad.com/) and [training](https://ninja-squad.com/training/angular)) are up-to-date with these changes if you want to learn more!
