---
layout: post
title: What's new in Angular CLI 17.0?
author: cexbrayat
tags: ["Angular 17", "Angular", "Angular CLI"]
description: "Angular CLI 17.0 is out!"
---

[Angular CLI 17.0.0](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/releases/tag/17.0.0) is out!✨

If you want to upgrade to 17.0.0 without pain (or to any other version, by the way), I have created a Github project to help: [angular-cli-diff](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff). Choose the version you're currently using (16.2.0 for example), and the target version (17.0.0 for example), and it gives you a diff of all files created by the CLI: [angular-cli-diff/compare/16.2.0...17.0.0](https://github.com/cexbrayat/angular-cli-diff/compare/16.2.0...17.0.0).
It can be a great help along with the official `ng update @angular/core @angular/cli` command.
You have no excuse for staying behind anymore!

Let's see what we've got in this release.

## Standalone applications with Vite by default!

The `--standalone` flag is now the default behavior of the CLI.
This means generating a new project with `ng new` now uses standalone components by default,
and that the `ng generate component/pipe/directive` command now generates standalone components/pipes/directives.

Another notable change to `ng new` is that the routing is now enabled by default.

But the most important change is that the CLI now uses [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) out-of-the-box!
A new builder called `application` has been introduced, and is used when generating a new project.
This builder has a very similar configuration to the `browser` builder,
so the migration is quite easy if you want to use Vite in an existing project
You have to change the builder from `browser` to `application` in the `angular.json` file,
rename the `main` property to `browser`,
and remove a few options from the development configuration (`buildOptimizer`, `vendorChunk`).

Once migrated, the `ng serve` command will use Vite instead of Webpack.
Build time should be faster, especially for cold starts (I saw 2-3x times improvement on my machine).
There is no HMR by default yet, but the global style changes are detected and applied automatically without reloading the page.

Note that the output of the `ng build` Vite-based command is now in `dist/my-project/browser` instead of `dist/my-project`.

The `browser-esbuilder` builder still exists, but will be removed in the future.
You should use the `application` builder instead.

## ng new --ssr

A new flag `--ssr` has been added to the `ng new` command to generate a new project
with SSR enabled out of the box.

It generates a project similar to what you usually get and then runs the `@angular/ssr` schematics
(you can also use the schematics directly on an existing project with `ng add @angular/ssr`).
`@angular/ssr` is a new package and replaces the Angular Universal package.
If you were using the Angular Universal package, `ng update` migrates your configuration to use `@angular/ssr` automatically.

This schematic does the following:

- adds the `@angular/ssr` package
- adds the `@angular/platform-server` package
- adds the `express` and `@types/express` packages
- adds the `main.server.ts` file (entry point for the application when running on the server)
- adds the `app.config.server.ts` file (providers for the application when running on the server)
- adds the `tsconfig.server.json` file
- adds the `server.ts` file (the Express server, responsible for serving the application)

It updates the `angular.json` configuration to add the following options to the `build` target:

```json
"server": "src/main.server.ts",
"prerender": true,
"ssr": {
  "entry": "server.ts"
}
```

and adds the `provideClientHydration()` to the (browser) application providers,
to have a smooth transition between the server and the client.
This is a new feature of Angular v16, and we talked about it in our article about the [v16 release](/2023/05/03/what-is-new-angular-16.0).

When running `ng build`, the CLI will now build the server bundle (in `dist/my-project/server`) and the client bundle (in `dist/my-project/browser`).
You can then run the generated server with:

    node dist/my-project/server/main.server.mjs

This starts an Express server on port 4000 by default, which serves the rendered pages.

The rendered pages are in the `browser` folder, and are named `${page}/index.html`:

    dist/my-project/browser/index.html
    dist/my-project/browser/login/index.html
    dist/my-project/browser/register/index.html


If you use `localize` in your application, the CLI will also build the localized bundles (in `dist/my-project/server/${lang}`).

The prerendering mechanism should be quite accurate now,
as it uses the Angular router under the hood to navigate to each route and render it
(routes with parameters or redirections are skipped).
When prerendering is enabled, the CLI generates a `prerendered-routes.json` file
that contains all the prerendered routes.
This is useful if you deploy on the cloud as this file is usually recognized by providers
to serve these files as static.

    {
      "routes": [
        "/",
        "/login",
        "/register"
        ...
      ]
    }

You can disable the auto-discovery of routes by setting the `discoverRoutes` option to `false` in the `angular.json` file. You can also provide your own list of routes in this file by defining `routeFiles`:

    "ssr": {
      "discoverRoutes": false,
      "routeFiles": "ssg-routes.txt"
    }

This file must contain a list of routes that you want to render (and can contain parameterized routes).

When running `ng serve`, the CLI serves the application via Vite,
and only pre-renders the requested page (the one you're currently on).

You can also use a new option to `CommonEngine` called `enablePerformanceProfiler` to trace the performance of each step of the rendering:

    const commonEngine = new CommonEngine({
      enablePerformanceProfiler: true
    });

When using SSR, it is recommended to use the Fetch version of the HTTP client,
by using `provideHttpClient(withFetch())`
(as introduced in [Angular v16.1](/2023/06/14/what-is-new-angular-16.1)).
This is for performance and compatibility reasons.

    NG02801: Angular detected that `HttpClient` is not configured to use `fetch` APIs. It's strongly recommended to enable `fetch` for applications that use Server-Side Rendering for better performance and compatibility. To enable `fetch`, add the `withFetch()` to the `provideHttpClient()` call at the root of the application.


## Functional HTTP interceptors by default

The CLI now generates functional interceptors by default,
without the need to specify `--functional` anymore.
Class-based interceptors are still available with the `--no-functional` option,
but you're now encouraged to use the functional ones.


## Summary

That's all for the CLI v17.0 release!
You'll find more interesting features in our article about the
[framework v17.0.0 release](/2023/11/09/what-is-new-angular-17.0).

All our materials ([ebook](https://books.ninja-squad.com/angular), [online training](https://angular-exercises.ninja-squad.com/) and [training](https://ninja-squad.com/training/angular)) are up-to-date with these changes if you want to learn more!
